Authentication and Authorization chapter for MAUI eBook (#30262)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/maui/authentication-and-authorization.md

:::image type="content" source="media/authentication-dedicated-authentication-microservice.png" alt-text="Authentication by a dedicated authentication microservice.":::

The eShopOnContainers mobile app communicates with the identity microservice, which uses IdentityServer 4 to perform authentication, and access control for APIs. Therefore, the mobile app requests tokens from IdentityServer, either for authenticating a user or for accessing a resource:

- Authenticating users with IdentityServer is achieved by the mobile app requesting an _identity_ token, representing an authentication process's outcome. At a minimum, it contains an identifier for the user and information about how and when the user is authenticated. It can also include additional identity data.
- Accessing a resource with IdentityServer is achieved by the mobile app requesting an _access_ token, which allows access to an API resource. Clients request access tokens and forward them to the API. Access tokens contain information about the client and the user, if present. APIs then use that information to authorize access to their data.

> [!NOTE]

> > A client must be registered with IdentityServer before it can request tokens.

Author: Ha, I suppose that is correct. I am going to update the language here on this a little bit and supply a link. Let me know if that works.

- A unique client ID.
- The allowed interactions with the token service (known as the grant type).
- The location where identity and access tokens are sent to (known as a redirect URI).
- A list of resources that the client is allowed access to (known as scopes).

When configuring clients, the `AddInMemoryClients` method expects an `IEnumerable<Client>` collection. The following code example shows the configuration for the eShopOnContainers mobile app in the `GetClients` method that provides this collection in the eShopOnContainers reference application:

```csharp
public static IEnumerable<Client> GetClients(Dictionary<string,string> clientsUrl)
{
    return new List<Client>
    {
        // Omitted for brevity
        new Client
        {
            ClientId = "xamarin",
            ClientName = "eShop Xamarin OpenId Client",
            AllowedGrantTypes = GrantTypes.Hybrid,
            ClientSecrets =
            {
                new Secret("secret".Sha256())
            },
            RedirectUris = { clientsUrl["Xamarin"] },
            RequireConsent = false,
            RequirePkce = true,

>             PostLogoutRedirectUris = { $"{clientsUrl["Xamarin"]}/Account/Redirecting" },

Author: I agree on that. The services side code is managed separately. We could update it for the book and MAUI app and update the API code later. I am open to that. Thoughts @nishanil?

>             AllowedCorsOrigins = { "http://eshopxamarin" },

Author: This would be the same as above. I am going to assume whatever tactic we choose there will carry over here.

For information about page navigation, see [Navigation](navigation.md). For information about how WebView navigation causes a view model method to be executed, see [Invoking navigation using behaviors](navigation.md#invoking-navigation-using-behaviors). For information about application settings, see [Configuration management](configuration-management.md).

> [!NOTE]
> The eShopOnContainers also allows a mock sign in when the app is configured to use mock services in the `SettingsView`. In this mode, the app doesn't communicate with IdentityServer, instead allowing the user to sign in using any credentials.

### Signing-out

> When the user taps the `LOG OUT` button in the `ProfileView`, the `LogoutCommand` in the `ProfileViewModel` class is executed, which executes the `LogoutAsync` method. This method performs page navigation to the `LoginView` page, passing a `LogoutParameter` instance set to `true` as a parameter.

Author: This is absolutely common. In this case, the navigation code is abstracted away from MAUI via an interface, so it doesn't break testability of the view model. This way, the view side just acts as input and output and the view model contains all relevant business logic.

The `WebView` will be redirected to the post-logout redirect URI in the mobile app. This `WebView` navigation will cause the `NavigateAsync` method in the `LoginViewModel` class to be executed, which is shown in the following code example:

```csharp
private async Task NavigateAsync(string url)
{
    var unescapedUrl = System.Net.WebUtility.UrlDecode(url);

    if (unescapedUrl.Equals(GlobalSetting.Instance.LogoutCallback, StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase))
    {
        _settingsService.AuthAccessToken = string.Empty;

>         _settingsService.AuthIdToken = string.Empty;

Author: I totally understand that and don't really disagree. The GlobalSettings class serves as an in-memory at runtime settings manager. The `ISettingsService`, and the implementations, are more of an at-rest and persistable set of settings. I think that we could do something to rename global settings though, like `StateManager` or similar to help further separate them out. Thoughts?

>         _settingsService.AuthIdToken = string.Empty;

Reviewer: Yes, that would make a lot more sense.In Blazor we call that `AppState`, which is just an observable set of in-memory state. You might consider using that as a name?

{
    var identityUrl = Configuration.GetValue<string>("IdentityUrl");
    app.UseIdentityServerAuthentication(new IdentityServerAuthenticationOptions
    {
        Authority = identityUrl.ToString(),
        ScopeName = "basket",
        RequireHttpsMetadata = false,
    });
}
```

This method ensures that the API can only be accessed with a valid access token. The middleware validates the incoming token to ensure that it's sent from a trusted issuer and validates that the token is valid to be used with the API that receives it. Therefore, browsing to the ordering or basket controller will return a `401 (unauthorized)` HTTP status code, indicating that an access token is required.

> [!NOTE]
> IdentityServer's authorization middleware must be added to the web application's HTTP request pipeline before adding MVC with `app.UseMvc()` or `app.UseMvcWithDefaultRoute()`.

## Making access requests to APIs

When making requests to the ordering and basket microservices, the access token, obtained from IdentityServer during the authentication process, must be included in the request, as shown in the following code example:

```csharp
var authToken = Settings.AuthAccessToken;

> Order = await _ordersService.GetOrderAsync(Convert.ToInt32(order.OrderNumber), authToken);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Order = await _ordersService.GetOrderAsync(order.OrderNumber, authToken);
```

The `Convert.ToInt32` was a code smell to me, so upon further investigation, I realized that code doesn't exist anymore and instead the `order.OrderNumber` is already an `int.

Author: good catch. It was a string in the old version. I hated it and updated the code side, but missed it in the docs!

```csharp
[Authorize]
public sealed class BasketController : Controller
{
    // Omitted for brevity
}
```

If an unauthorized user attempts to access a controller or action marked with the Authorize attribute, the API framework returns a `401 (unauthorized)` HTTP status code.

> [!NOTE]

> > Parameters can be specified on the Authorize attribute to restrict an API to specific users. For more information, see [Authorization](/aspnet/core/security/authorization/introduction) on the Microsoft Documentation Center.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Parameters can be specified on the Authorize attribute to restrict an API to specific users. For more information, see [ASP.NET Core Docs: Authorization](/aspnet/core/security/authorization/introduction).
```
